<style>
   body
   {
      font-family: Arial, Helvitica, Sans;
      font-size:13px !important;
      background: url('../../art/img/bg_texture.jpg') !important;
   }

   hr
   { border: none; }

   .frame
   {
      display: inline-block;
      background: rgba(100,100,100,0.15);
      padding:12px;
      text-align:center;
      vertical-align:top;
      border: 1px solid rgba(128,128,128,0.3);
      border-radius: 5px;
      margin: 15px;
   }

   .span
   { display:block; }

   .info
   {
      display:block;
      font-style:italic;
      font-size:12px;
      padding-left:15px;
   }

   .bigTxt
   {
      display:inline-block;
      vertical-align:top;
      font-size:40px;
      line-height:60px;
      padding-left:10px;
      padding-right:10px;
   }

   .pageNext
   { margin-bottom:800px; }

   .pageHead
   { height:30px; }

</style>

<br>




# Concepts
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This chapter name is somewhat ambiguous, because is describes overall "VAMP language concepts" and it also describes "runtime concepts".

- "Language concepts" describe concepts used in the language
- "Runtime concepts" are defined globals used in your programmes

There are only a few crucial "runtime concepts" loaded at "boot time" (when your project starts up), the rest is loaded when used in your VAMP code.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
<br>


## Language Concepts

Generally a person needs to know "what stuff is" so you can know what you're dealing with. The following describes some language concepts used in VAMP.
<br><br><br><br>




### Literals
In VAMP "literals" are "glyphs" that represent something that is always the same.<br>
Literals are typically used as the "name" -or value of things.<br>
These are the basic building blocks of any structure or programme and they have 5 groups:

- `numeric literals` : numbers, i.e: `1`, `2345`, `0.5`, `98.3`, etc.
- `alphabetic literals` : letters, i.e: `a`, `bcd`, `EFGH`, `ijKL`, etc.
- `alpha-numeric literals` : letters combined with numbers, i.e: `a1`, `2B3`, `c45De`, etc.
- `delimit literals` : characters used inbetween operators and literals i.e: "white-space", `_`
- `reference literals` : special characters directly infront of literals i.e: `$`, `#`, `@`
<br><br><br>





### Constants
In VAMP, "constants" are names of "pointers" that point to values that cannot change.<br>
As you may know, "literals" are a type of "constant" because they always have the same value.<br>

Constants are available in the scope it was defined in. When a constant is defined at Root level, it is available everywhere, else it is only available by inheritence -or by relationship.

There are 4 kinds of constants:
- `root` built into the language -or defined at root level and starts with a Capital letter
- `data` used to hold any "number" or "unparsed data" value
- `unit` used to specify some kind of "unit", or "number base"
- `cast` used to transform a value into something else -often into something completely different

It is important to remember that the names of "concepts", "constants", "variables", "functions", etc, -are only pointers that "point to" (refers) a value, so they can be passed around and assigned as you wish without worrying about huge chunks of data being thrown around at all.
<br><br>



#### root constants

The "intrinsic" (built in) constants are:

- `Bare`, `None` : both are logically "null"
- `Fals`, `False`: both are "boolean false"
- `True` : boolean "true"
- `Root` : refers to your "project root"
<br><br>

You can define a "root" constant in your prject root folder as a file with its name like: `Foo.v`.<br>
Note that this file-name starts with a Capital letter. Any files directly in your "project root" are seen as "concepts" (more on this below). This means they are Globals and only accessable from other concepts if they relate.

In order to make this "concept" a "root constant" with a value, you need to specify some values inside the file, like this:

```vamp
{
   Auth: {read:Root, edit:None}     .:    global read access, read-only
   Gist: 'some special value'       .:    the value of this "Foo" concept
}
```

The concept you just created above is now globally accessable like this:
```vamp
Foo            ::    some special value
(Foo)          ::    some special value
```
<br><br>



#### data constants

Here's an example of defining a "data constant":

```vamp
#foo: 'bar'
```

Constants nested in the tree structure of a concept are accessable by calling its parent with the arguments containing the constant, the same rules apply, see "variables" below.
<br><br><br>



#### unit constants
Units are numbers with special meaning, like `kg` (kilogram), or `hz` (hertz), etc.<br>
They are defined & governed by the "unit library" in your VAMP instalation. If there is no unit available for what you want to use, you can make your own.

Expressions & operators are explained later, but, here are some examples of how unit constants are used:
```vamp
(#0.3:Lt = #300:Ml)     ::  True
(#1:Hrs - #15:Min)      ::  #45:Min  ::  the result unit is what is on the right of `-`
```
<br>



#### cast constants
Cast constants are used in expressions when you want to convert data-types, or transform some value into another value as defined by the "cast".

Here are some examples of how cast constants are used:

```vamp
$foo: `What's that "semi-weird_text"?`
$bar: ($foo % #CASE:CC)

($foo % #CASE:UL)  ::  WHAT's THAT "SEMI-WEIRD_TEXT"?
($foo % #CASE:LL)  ::  what's that "semi-weird_text"?
($foo % #CASE:UW)  ::  What's That "Semi-weird_text"?
($foo % #CASE:CC)  ::  WhatSThatSemiWeirdText
($foo % #CASE:CB)  ::  whatSthatSemiWeirdText

($bar % #CHOP:UL)  ::  [What,S,That,Semi,Weird,Text]
```
<br><br><br>





### Variables
In VAMP, "variables" are names of "pointers" that point to values that may change.<br>
Variables are directly acessable within the scope they were defined, else they can be accessable by refering to them via their parent node, either from deeper in the current tree-structure -or external to the tree structure; however external access to variables (and constants) are prohibited unless the context that is refering to that variable has a relationship with the target variable's parent tree structure.

Variables can be defined and accessed like this:

```vamp
$foo: 'bar'

$foo        ::    bar
$.foo       ::    bar

($foo)      ::    bar
($.foo)     ::    bar
```
<br>


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
<br>


## Runtime Concepts

*TODO*
